# .gitignore

In this topic, we'll learn about the `.gitignore` file, what it is, and why it's important. We'll also learn how to use it to exclude files from version control.

- [`.gitignore`](#gitignore)
  - [.gitignore in the Context of Node.js](#gitignore-in-the-context-of-nodejs)
    - [Explanation of the Previous Example](#explanation-of-the-previous-example)
    - [What to Include in `.gitignore`](#what-to-include-in-gitignore)
    - [What Not to Include in `.gitignore`](#what-not-to-include-in-gitignore)
  - [Exercises](#exercises)

Briefly, a `.gitignore` file contains rules about the files and folders that Git should ignore, meaning they should not be added to version control, such as various secret or environment-specific files, temporary files, environment-specific files, and third-party dependencies.

## .gitignore in the Context of Node.js

Here is an example of a typical `.gitignore` file for Node.js projects:
```
# Logs
logs/
*.log
npm-debug.log*

# Runtime data
pids/
*.pid
*.seed
*.log

# Library folder for jscoverage/JSCover generated instrumented libraries
lib-cov/

# Coverage folder used by tools like istanbul
coverage/

# NYC test coverage
.nyc_output/

# Dependency folder
node_modules/

# IDE - Integrated Development Environment settings
.idea/
.vscode/

# Environment variables (dotenv files)
.env
.env.test

# Mac files
.DS_Store

# Optional npm cache folder
.npm

# Optional eslint cache
.eslintcache

# Optional REPL history
.node_repl_history
```

### Explanation of the Previous Example

- **Logs:** Log files and directories are typically ignored because they often contain runtime data that does not need to be versioned.
- **Runtime Data:** All generated PID or seed files should also be excluded.
- **Test Coverage Data:** Directories such as `lib-cov`, `coverage`, and `.nyc_output` contain test coverage data and should be excluded.
- **`node_modules/`:** This is an important folder for Node.js projects that does not need to be included in version control. When third-party packages are installed via `npm` or `yarn`, these packages are stored in this folder. This folder should be excluded because:
  - it can be large, making cloning and pulling slow;
  - dependencies can be installed environment-specifically. This ensures that when another developer or CI/CD (Continuous Integration/Continuous Delivery) clones the repository, the exact versions specified in `package-lock.json` or `yarn.lock` files are installed.
- **IDE Settings:** Folders like `.idea/` (for JetBrains IDEs) and `.vscode/` (for Visual Studio Code) contain user-specific code editor settings. These should be ignored to avoid overwriting another developer's configuration.
- **Environment Variables:** Files like `.env` often contain sensitive or environment-specific values. These should be ignored to prevent leakage of sensitive information and allow different developers or environments to maintain their specific configurations.
- **Mac-specific:** `.DS_Store` is a system file generated by Mac OS that is not necessary for the application code.
- **Cache Files:** `.npm` and `.eslintcache` are cache folders/files that do not need to be versioned.
- **REPL History:** `.node_repl_history` is a history file when you use the Node REPL (command line environment).

### What to Include in `.gitignore`

- Generated and temporary files.
- Environment-specific files.
- Third-party dependencies (like `node_modules/`).
- IDE and editor configuration files.
- Secrets and configuration files with environment-specific values.
- OS-specific files (like `.DS_Store`).

### What Not to Include in `.gitignore`

- Project source code and files that accompany the code.
- Configuration files that are necessary for running the application and shared among all project instances (except secrets).
- Documentation and related assets.
- Build and deployment scripts.

Remember, the purpose of the `.gitignore` file is to keep your repository clean by excluding files and folders that do not offer value in version control. It also helps prevent unintentional versioning of sensitive data or user-specific settings.

## Exercises

Try to explain in your own words what a `.gitignore` is and why it is important.

Next, try to complete the following tasks:

- Create a `.gitignore` file in your repository.
- Add `draft.md` to the `.gitignore` file.
- Commit the `.gitignore` file to your repository.
- Create a new file named `draft.md` and add some content to it.
- Check if `draft.md` is ignored by Git (try to commit it).
